---
layout: default
title: Why Classrooms Fail II-III
---

# Why Classrooms Fail II-III
<p class="font3 right">1 JANUARY 2026</p>

From May and June 2025 to November 2025, I helped deliver the AoPS classes Calculus and Intermediate Algebra, respectively. Due to their concurrence they have mostly occupied the same locus in my brain, so I will write their post-morta in ensemble.

The Calculus class wound up extremely small, almost too small (and I love small classes). We started with around 60 students, but the number gradually fell to less than 20, with only about 10 active by the end of the class. It's worth mentioning that in those weeks where we took a break after the first hour, we ended the second hour with closer to 15 actives. In addition to breaks, asking more qualitative / recall questions than I thought we needed turned out to be quite good at increasing participation. I was much happier with the level of participation in the Intermediate Algebra class, which saw a normal drop rate (around 40%, which is still not ideal) and a less than average activity drop-off within lessons (approximately 30%, also not ideal but better than most classes).

I can't really take issue with the curricula this time around because the courses are intended as more rigorous versions of the canonical AP Calculus and College Algebra courses, respectively. That said, my personal calculus tastes would place slightly more emphasis on the big topological ideas floating around, like sequences and the big theorems: intermediate value, boundedness, extreme value, mean value, inverse function. My favourite part of the calculus curriculum is its treatment of integration. We spend a good four weeks developing rigorous foundations, practicing solving extremely difficult integrals (I struggled to solve some of them), and then another two weeks building up to a stronger treatment of improper integrals than found in most first-year university courses! For algebra, I would have liked to spend more time on naive set theory and inequalities (which would pay dividends when these students move on to calculus) and less time on weird (piecewise, integer and fractional part) functions which don't possess an obvious reason to exist. Either way, I genuinely believe AoPS teaches calculus and algebra far better than any other program I'm aware of, so I have very few complaints.

The worst topic in Calculus in terms of my teaching was the chain rule. Scarily, I failed to even notice how bad it was until the students kept struggling with the chain rule into the two weeks on differential equations at the end of the course. So I'm not exactly sure what went wrong. Maybe we should have slowed down and worked through more examples of computing derivatives of compositions of elementary functions from first principles before stating the abstract chain rule, because at this stage students are still learning to navigate function composition and the seemingly aleatory placements of primes. Bombarding students with implicit differentiation in the same lesson probably did not help much with their symbol-decoding. When I was in high school, implicit differentiation was only introduced when it became absolutely necessary (i.e. related rates problems), and I remember finding this approach quite natural. A third solution could be to squeeze in another cherished Extra Problems Day before moving on to integration, recollecting and synthesizing everything about continuity and derivatives before momentarily forgetting all about them.

My best work came in my exposition of sequences. This is unsurprising given my tastes, but I was expecting students to struggle much more with sequences and especially divergence. Since I am decidedly not allowed to talk about one-point compactification and neighbourhoods of infinity, the "boundedness" perspective (in fancy terms, sequences diverging to infinity leave every compact subset) proved very insightful. Perhaps our treatment of ordinary limits and continuity was so robust that the students easily generalized their insights to sequences, because the concepts of boundedness and monotonicity for sequences came very naturally to them. The students pretty much discovered the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem with minimal hand-holding!

I'm slightly less certain about this judgement, but I think my worst-explained topic for algebra was inequalities. I think students became very sharp with the trivial inequality and triangle inequality, but most of them never really internalized the QM–AM–GM–HM chain or the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality. I wish we had enough time to prove the general AM–GM inequality, because it's quite unclear how the proofs of the cases we did (n = 2 and 4) generalize, and so the students probably had some difficulty accepting the statement. For Cauchy–Schwarz, the proof which occurs to me as the most natural is the linear-algebraic one, which would might be a bit tedious to translate to the setting of this course but I think it would still be better than our discriminant-heavy heuristic. But more importantly, I wish we placed more emphasis on the somewhat ill-defined but definitely trainable process of proving interesting inequalities, rather than trick-dominated applications of these famous inequalities (I don't think this should be a hot take). I do find the QM–AM–GM–HM inequalities to be elegant, but it feels wrong to give students the impression that most inequalities with some sort of symmetry arise as an easy corollary of them. On the other hand, this is slightly more true of the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, but seeing these corollaries often requires a bit more dexterity with inequalities and I would have liked to make this more explicit in our exercises. In practice not all inequalities are symmetrical, and I would have liked to present other inequalities with illuminating proofs such as Bernoulli's inequality, which is done by a relatively easy yet instructive proof by induction!

I was very pleased to notice how fluent our algebra students became with complex numbers, because their abstractness, along with certain facts like Euler's formula being offered with little explanation, marks a dangerous bend for most students. The largest contributor to this success was probably the geometric approach we adopted, with A LOT of pictures of rectangular coordinates, polar coordinates, all the basic arithmetic operations, and other transformations. Almost the entire duration of class involved the students qualitatively describing the geometry of objects in the complex plane, which was both incredibly smooth and amazing for participation. Provided that complex numbers did not play a huge role in the remainder of the course, I think this intuition-building style of lesson was far more productive than would be a more hands-dirty algebraic approach. In fact, we managed to squeeze in the main algebraic insights at a surprisingly high frequency!

Many thanks to Jerry, Margaret, Achilleas, and Yee-Lynn for two long and wonderful courses this year.

---
