---
layout: default
title: Abstract Nonsense as a Vessel for Thought
permalink: /abstract-nonsense/
---

# Abstract Nonsense as a Vessel for Thought
###### January 2025
Within my first quarter at the University of Toronto, I recognized that the most efficient way to whatsess the whatness of a wide variety of fields in mathematics was through the Putnam contest training sessions. Without a hope I was lost but on a measure zero set of enjambments, yet each jambe I could enjambe proved exceedingly worthwhile. The sessions were led by a different (usually tenure-track) professor each week, which seemed the perfect opportunity to witness a day in the life of the working mathematician. Moreover, Ignacio rallied enough optimism to invite me to double the frequency of my training sessions (read: double the magnitude of my imposter syndrome) by joining the advanced training group every Monday in addition to the open sessions. The advanced sessions were concomitantly more exclusive and more egoless. Less like a competition, more like a conference of chimpanzees entrusted with an arsenal of curious thoughts. The most exciting professor I met in this manner was Jacob Tsimerman (sorry Ignacio). In part because he was notably younger than the rest, in other part because he could be the greatest mathematician I'll ever know. He hadn't even looked at the problems to prepare for the session; he, ad libitum, presented flawless solutions to the 8-10 worksheet problems in just a few minutes under the hour. To this day, I'm not sure if this inspires me or shatters my dreams into pieces. Contemplating something in between, I stayed after the session to chat about algebraic number theory and a conjecture of Yves André and Frans Oort which he had recently proven; number fields turned into the category of schemes; and just as I thought I heard God calling my name, he tersely curted *"you'd best master your kindergarten knowledge before getting into that abstract nonsense."* (By kindergarten, he meant undergraduate.) And on that very day, I, out of blindness, admiration, or defiance, decided I would study category theory — the category theorist's term for abstract nonsense.

One year later, I'm taking group theory with the venerable Joe Repka. It's canonical for undergraduate algebra courses to follow the arduously verbose Dummit & Foote, but I, in the secrecy of my bedroom, pledge allegiance the monolith that is *Algebra* by Serge Lang (coincidentally Joe's PhD advisor (incidentally Joe's PhD coadvisor)). Less than eight pages into the book, Lang mentions the automorphism group of an object in a category. Only 45 pages following, Lang formally introduces categories, universal objects, products, fiber products, and coproducts, pullbacks and pushouts, functors covariant and contravariant. Joe likes to mention Serge Lang's audacity and contempt for category theory on occasion, although he is hesitant to share intimate stories of his famously prolific teacher. In the first and second editions of Serge Lang's *Algebra* (unfortunately I have the distilled third), the unique exercise accompanying the section on homology reads:

*"Take any book on homological algebra, and prove all the theorems without looking at the proofs in that book.*

*Homological alebgra was invented by Eilenberg-MacLane. General category theory (i.e. the theory of arrow-theoretic results) is generally known as abstract nonsense (the terminology is due to Steenrod)."*

In December, the definition of a category is presented in my topology lecture. We need (I use the word *need* very lightly. More likely is this being Dror's attempt to indoctrinate us, and to demolish everyone who dares to flout) it to study the homotopy classes of continuous functions. We don't really use the homotopy category until the very last lecture. And the second hour is allocated to Dror's tirade on the axiom of choice, under the guise of constructing an absurdist limit function defined for any bounded sequence. So we spend three hours on the preliminaries required for the one hour of foolishness. For this precisely, Dror ranks first in my list of nonbelievers in the axiom of choice. Dror's PhD advisor was the equally revered Ed Witten, most celebrated for being the only person who knows how to apply category theory to the physical universe. Witten is said to possess an alien talent for finding obvious those things which would demand from most mathematicians or scientists years of reasoning. Dror insists *"he knew the answer to every question my mortal mind could conceive."* I think Dror suffered from the opposite condition; he could stack the sediment of reasoning underneath even the most obvious of statements. I remember we tediously constructed, with proofs of existence and uniqueness, the subspace, product, metric, and quotient topologies from their universal properties. In our final problem set, I muster a proof that π₁ is a functor from Top∗ to Grp, and memoize it like a poem. Retained as a memory from the heart. (Vervaeke would shudder if he heard this metaphor coming out of my mouth.) Not like my email password or on what day all my problem sets are due; more like my mother's birthday, the voice of a friend, the advice of someone I admire. Clearly, I haven't been a great listener.

Another month passes. I'm studying topological K-theory as part of a supervised reading, so I can now half-proudly use the term category theory without being gunned down by the governing council of higher category theory elitists. Associating a pseudo-abelian category to the category of vector bundles over a topological space dwarfs any category theory I saw in MAT327, which is starting to look a lot like kindergarten. I've drawn more commutative diagrams in seven days than I have in my entire previous life, and I'm blackening pages with accelerating pace. I can feel myself slowly flattening into a cog in the lemma-theorem-corollary-example assembly line. I can only hope mathematics' grand machinery will one day produce a tranquil mind. To answer my prayers, my supervisor says, in our second meeting, something perfect to the effect of *"think of category theory as a way to collect your thoughts."* I suppose my writing this love letter / diatribe is proof I have been thinking the opposite.

I'm vastly underqualified to comment on the (im)possibility of category theory yielding some revolutionary corollary in the epistemology of epistemology (2-epistemology) or the metaphysics of metaphysics (2-metaphysics). (On the subject of corollaries, a roll is to rally orally.) The hopeful call such endeavours "higher" category theory. The depleted don't call it anything. I would not consider myself especially hopeful or depleted; instead, I shall try to act as an intermediary between the delusional and the disillusioned.

First, an analogy that is unlikely to resonate with anyone except my very self: category theory is the Shostakovich 15 of mathematics. Shostakovich doesn't discriminate. To his ears, all music is equivalent. And by interpolating history itself, he composed a symphony to reach beyond. Not quite death or transcendence, but awfully close. Correspondingly, category theory doesn't discriminate. To its arrows, all math is equivalent. And those arrows — the mathematical study of mathematics, meta-math, 2-math, math², comath, whatever-you-call-it — are commissioning a hope to puncture a hole outo the ontological exterior.

A frequent line of attack against category theory is its tendency to tread into the dangerously abstract or the nomenclaturic absurd. But is this not true of ~80% of all mathematicians? When Cantor accounted the uncountable, when Galois dissolved the quintic, each using ludicrous notation and inconceivable degrees of abstraction, is this not precisely what they envisioned? A mathematical universe in which data from a graded ring can be directly related to the stable homotopy group? Even Serge Lang, who belittled category theory for a living, tacitly thought this abstract nonsense auspicious enough to include it in his brainchild of an algebra textbook.

Another moat that divides the category theorist from the working mathematician is the constructivist philosophy: why spend time doing work that has ε-small probability of ever becoming a concrete reality? To this point I have almost no rebuttal (it's true that Ed Witten maybe found some applications of K-theory to string theory, but there's decent reason to believe there won't be another Ed Witten), but I have a genuinely difficult time believing pure constructivists can even become mathematicians today. Not by any limitation in ability, but by extreme disillusionment with the state of modern academic mathematics. (There is nothing I would enjoy more than to see a mathematical purist take an undergraduate course in partial differential equations.) Thus it is reasonable to assume these protests originate from those selective constructivists; i.e. those who will only accept non-constructive existence proofs when deemed inoffensive or convenient. Even Dror — I would pry apart my ribcage like the man behind the screen before speaking ill of Dror — has somewhat paradoxically fallen in love with category theory while he cannot bear the axiom of choice.

Another analogy: Borges is debatably my very favourite writer, and of the many techniques he perfected is one which he meta-captions (2-captions?) in his story The Cruel Redeemer Lazarus Morell as "The Remote Cause". Starting from a(n often banal) remote cause, he draws hyperspecific associations, possibly telling several sub-short stories in the process, until he arrives at the titular story. In essence, it's his way of ensuring his work draws on no less than everything and of emphasizing the interconnectedness of all things, while perfectly situating the récit and intercepting all those half-ideas from narratives he never bothered to realize. Category theory fulfills exactly this role of the remote cause in the mathematical universe. The reorientation of problem space via functor and self-referential genius of 2-categories, 3-categories, ... , ∞-categories are reminiscent of Borges's convolutions and exercise of total authorial freedom. Borges once conjectured:

*"Writing long books is a laborious and impoverishing act of foolishness: expanding in five hundred pages an idea that could be perfectly explained in a few minutes. A better procedure is to pretend that those books already exist and to offer a summary, a commentary."*

By simply substituting "proofs" in place of "books," one will obtain the very Gestalt of category theory.

Under this analogy, categories simply become a sort of blueprint for conducting mathematical work, for spinning a marvelous web from seemingly disparate threads, a frozen-through apple of schemes (not the Grothendieck kind) to toss around with as it snowballs into something greater. Not only does this produce the ideal breeding ground for recognition, it also provides a canonical design for making unrealized generalizations (mathematicians LOVE this) and unexpected connections (they love this too, but less so). Or, as Jacques Roubaud, Oulipian, mathematician, phrased it:

*"Mathematics is a great city whose suburbs never cease to grow in chaotic fashion on the surrounding lands, while its center is periodically reconstructed, each time following a clearer plan and a more majestic arrangement, demolishing the old sections with their labyrinthine alleys, in order to launch new avenues to the periphery, always more direct, wider and more convenient."*

Here the category assumes the role of the urban planner, the mayor's puppeteer, the Moloch Machine. It decides what to preserve and what to demolish, how to arrange winding boulevards and erect colossal skyscrapers. It is the metropolis's philosophy of progress, its Hippodamian plan. Truly, it is the *perfect* way to collect thoughts. Elegant and metacognitive.

*"The transmission of mathematics has today been rendered more precarious than ever by the fact that no single mathematician can fully understand any longer more than a tiny fraction of mathematics. Modern mathematics can be kept alive only by a large number of mathematicians cultivating different parts of the same system of values: a community which can be kept coherent only by the passionate vigilance of universities, journals and meetings, fostering these values and imposing the same respect for them on all mathematicians."*

The above excerpt from Michael Polanyi's *Personal Knowledge* describes a most real reality of mathematics. I include it because I honestly, yet oversimplifyingly, believe category is vaguely responsible for mathematics not having been completely ruptured after World War II. (I mean, it first appeared in the literature September 1945. It's only reasonable to conclude that category theory has single-handedly prevented the Third. *Knowledge is a deadly friend if no one sets the rules*.) Provided the near-impossibility of making an algebraic topologist speak more than five words to a probabilist in the modern world, the conventions of category theory are quite literally the only forces upholding the system of values Polanyi mentions, and translating those ideas in a way every differential geometer and set theorist may comprehend. Indeed, universities, journals, and meetings are far too fallible, too political, to bear the burden. (I hope I am only selling shells to the sea here but) NYU hosts a large enough proportion of the world's PDE researchers to collusively produce a fradulent solution to Navier-Stokes and claim their 1 million dollar cheque today. Of course, all that is stopping them is category theory (not really). But between all my sardonicism, I hope the importance of the language of category theory for communicating mathematics, similar to the language of set theory for communicating logic, is well understood. Of course, there is just one difficulty:

Q: Who will watch the watchmen?

But this turns out to be not so troubling:

A: The Australians.

It's hardly a coincidence that categories share a name with the basic cognitive mechanism underpinning (sorry Vervaeke, I know they're pairwise integrated beyond comprehension) memory, insight, attention, meaning, the way we live. Based on my small balloonfull of understanding on the human mind, its mechanisms seem more akin to category theory than to geometry (as proposed by Benjamin Betts) or topology (as proposed by Kurt Lewin). No amount of etymological sorcery is responsible for this; category theory quite literally *is* the result of applying mental categorization to the study of mathematics. Consequently studying category theory is roughly equivalent to study categorization, while studying geometric or topological psychology seems like a zealous but laughably Arcadian pursuit.

One last analogy before I return to the dirt. In his nine-act *Strange Interlude*, Eugene O'Neill (ab)uses soliloquy, not unlike (although not quite like) *Circe* from James Joyce's *Ulysses*. O'Neill even tinkered with a performance concept in which only these soliloquied internal thoughts would be spoken aloud, and dialogue merely mouthed. The most ridiculed characteristic of category theory, the way mathematics becomes implicit to arrows dotted and dashed, serves a purpose adjacent to the O'Neillian soliloquy. Where O'Neill reconstructs human life from the bottomless depths of our minds, category theory reconstructs mathematics from its most primitive (structurally, not historically) origins: the picture and the arrow. And if one is willing to indulge in O'Neill's Freudian campaigning, the oracular glows within these immortal skeleta.

---