---
layout: default
title: All I'd like to keep
permalink: /keep/
---

# All I'd like to keep

<p class="font3 right">30 APRIL 2025</p>

Continued from <a href="/solitary">Solitary demands for</a>.

Below are my experimental observations enveloping each exam in a threehour-neighbourhood. To account for self-deception in my feelings of preparedness and due to my performance, I've distinguished a before and after. I tried to avoid retrospective adulteration, especially to the *Ante* sections. The course numbers won't mean much unless you're a fellow U of T student. The first three letters are pretty self-evident, but I've included the course names for readability.

1. MAT363: Classical Differential Geometry.
    * *Ante*: I expect this to be the easiest of my math exams, so I actually wrapped up my studying more than a few days in advance. Nonetheless, I've been thinking about the Levi-Civita connection almost continuously for the past 24 hours. While I don't expect that to help me solve any particular question on the exam (everything in this course lives in \\(\mathbb{R}^3\\), and trying to understand holonomy in terms of Levi-Civita is more insane than I am willing to be), it makes me feel a bit better about the rather sloppy treatment of parallel transport in this course. Overall anxiety is as low as it could conceivably be.
    * *Post*: Not much to add, my premonition was mostly accurate. There were a couple facts I probably should've recalled and instead had to prove on the spot, but nothing insurmountable.

2. PSY260: Learning and Plasticity.
    * *Ante*: Similarly to MAT363, I prematurely severed my studying arm. I haven't thought about neuroplasticity any more frequently than I typically do.
    * *Post*: Nothing at all to add. I've been too focused on my next exam to worry about the first two, which is precisely the desired outcome of this experiment. I've also found enough time to write up some notes on the <a href="/assets/files/ring-of-germs.pdf" class="pdf-link" target="_blank">ring of germs</a>, which was fun.

3. MAT347: Algebra.
    * *Ante*: My first scary exam. Stress levels are moderately high, but I've put the last 22 hours to use (hopefully) more useful than 5-hour \\(\mathbb{Z}[i]\\) Euclidean algorithm rehearsals. Namely, I studied for my next exam and learned some representations of Lie algebras! The hierarchy of integral domain conditions has been running through my mind nonstop. The tests for this class have fallen on the computationally infeasible side rather than the theoretically challenging side, but that's arguably more terrifying to me. I can only hope the last 22 hours have given me some composure, and that "classify all groups of order 78" will not appear as a question on the final.
    * *Post*: I'm quite happy with how it turned out. Admittedly I could probably have absorbed a few additional facts shortly before the test, saving some heart-in-mouth time scrambling, but I definitely don't regret having to squeeze out some information about conjugacy classes in \\(A_5\\) by force of spirit. And as a result of this experiment, I'm feeling quite good about my next exam, which is in a short while but is quickly followed by two more.

4. MAT257: Calculus on Manifolds.
    * *Ante*: In the past twenty-three hours, I've thought about everything under the sun except for calculus on manifolds. I can't speak much to exam-induced stress because my main stressors right now are not academic. I spent those twenty-three hours relatively well, studying for my next exam and preparing my upcoming talk. Either I am horribly unprepared for the atrocities that await me in an hour, or everything I've worked toward this year paid off honestly. This course has probably swallowed more Williamhours than any other, of all times, yet I still haven't committed differential forms into my basin of regenerable knowledge.
    * *Post*: My lack of fluency with orientation finnicks proved fatal in one instance, and I forgot how to apply Sard's theorem in another. Aside from the two small missteps, I'm quite happy with my efforts considering the final was much more difficult than most expected. 7-10 pm is not my favourite time to write an exam, and I was noticeably tired throughout. Though I doubt that caused any mental blocks; I think the material just wasn't as truly part of me as I had thought. And that's more of an issue with my in-semester learning rather than my final exam preparations. I'll have to stare into the abyss a little while longer to figure out where exactly I went wrong.

5. MAT267: Ordinary Differential Equations.
    * *Ante*: To come completely clean, I cheated myself here because I was showing the proof of the Schauder-Tychonoff to a classmate just within 24 hours of the exam. Neverthenonetheless, the past 22 hours were not as productive as I would have liked (I told myself I'd grind through the spin group chapter in Woit's Quantum Theory book, and managed to read less than half, mostly because studying for my next exam devoured more time than I planned), and truth be told I might be more stressed than I would have been, were I currently reviewing all the nasty half-proofs which were scribbled on a 10 cm x 10 cm cutout of the blackboard. That's T-2 hours, but I'm hopeful for a reversal around T-30 minutes. Most regrettably, I was more distracted during my weekly review than I have ever been, I think. It won't ruin the entirety of my next week, but I do worry it will set me back a week, in a less concrete sense. But I do feel ready, and I can pretty reliably reproduce all the proofs, with some real hard thinking. I have reasonable reason to believe the exam will be absurdly difficult: Ignacio is known to have put Putnam problems (A5 no less) on past MAT267 finals.
    * *Post*: I commited another transgression; my exam adjourned at 5:12 pm and it's 8:39 pm as of writing this. So my account may be less representative of my immediate reaction than I had intended, but right now I feel great. I solved every problem, which is already better than the midterms. I haven't made myself aware of any holes in my proofs, which is remarkable for the level of detail required in the proofs demanded. There was indeed a reversal of stress levels about 30 minutes prior to the exam, but I was especially tense throughout the first hour. I'm incredibly happy I didn't spend another 24 hours studying for this, because my preparations were more than sufficient. I'm not terribly happy with how I ended up spending those 24 hours, but at least I have something to improve upon next time. It's an unforgiving world, but Ignacio's not an unforgiving guy!

6. CSC373: Algorithms.
    * *Ante*: Somehow, it's before the exam I was least worried about a month ago that my nose decided to phlebotomize. I'm not sure if it was stress or dehydration, because I was the most stressed I've been all month yesterday and I went two and a half hours without drinking water during my MAT267 exam, some kind of flow state. My day has been spent cleaning, packing, and recollecting all my *real* classes this semester. I'm quite poorly prepared for this exam, although for most of the semester I've found this course quite redundant after CSC265 and I think it would take a particularly ghastly final exam to change my mind in this aspect.

    * *Post*: Given my earlier feelings of unpreparedness, I can't conceive a better outcome. I was so unbelievably correct when I arrogantly called this course unnecessary as a sequel to CSC265. Even though my performance was commendable, I think I must consider this iteration of the experiment a failure. The twenty-four hours leading up to this exam induced more anxiety than I would have felt, had I spent today studying for it. As a result, it was not a particularly productive day, although I was fortunate enough to enjoy some time with friends I had not seen in a while.

All signs point towards me adopting this strategy again in the future, although possibly with less restrictions or a different time allotment. The most glaring issue I intend to address is my effective use of the time window before each exam, which was rather poorly managed as outlined in some of the above points.

---
