---
layout: default
title: The red herring principle
permalink: /herring/
---

# The red herring principle

<p class="font3 right">1 NOVEMBER 2025</p>

The red herring principle is the principle that in mathematics, a “red herring” need not be either red or a herring. To provide a prototypical example, a *manifold with boundary* is not a *manifold* unless the boundary is empty. This is only slightly confusing; one should really think of "with" being an appendage, rather than a specialization. Indeed, we often use adjectives for specialization:
* a compact manifold,
* an oriented manifold,
* a simply connected manifold.
However, there exist unfortunate instances of specializing after the noun:
* a morphism of finite type,
* a function with compact support,
* a set with measure zero.
It is perhaps possible to refactor all these terms to specialize before the noun:
* a finite-type morphism,
* a compact-supported function,
* a measure-zero set,
but the hyphens may annoy some and verbal communication suffers when atomic adjectives are paired with phrasal adjectives ("a smooth proper compact-supported finite-type morphism"). It would be nice if the English written language possessed enough dimensions to unambiguously distinguish specialization and generalization, because "before" and "after" hardly suffice.

A more appropriate use of the hyphen would exhibit a red herring not as a herring that is red, but as a wholly new entity: a red-herring. I think the typing speed to clarity tradeoff is worthwhile, especially in the case of manifolds-with-boundary. I don't yet know a verbal solution aside from pronouncing manifoldwithboundary as if it were a single word.

---