---
layout: default
title: Who's Afraid of Thelonious Monk?
permalink: /monk/
---

# Who's Afraid of Thelonious Monk?
<p class="date">FEBRUARY 2025</p>

### Act I.
#### Scene 1: Archimedes in Appalachia
Upper Owen. December 7, 2024. Ernie and Sonny are dueling as camaraderie exponentiates, introductions overwhelm,

— Est-ce que ton amie parle le français?

To which I respond:

— Non, je ne crois pas.

footwear amasses, Drop Your Shoulders Take A Deep Breath... capitulates, coathangers populate, uncharted corners of the attic surface, the iron cabbagepot inundates and whistles, Please Use Your Assigned Washroom oscillates, the monolith chimes, medical experts prescribe, kitchen knives clamour, daggers unsheath,

— Nothing good ever happens in Bedford, Massachussets!

white flags unfurl, treaties ratify, music and laughter resound, the English alphabet baffles, Cyrillic even more, 

— прощай навсегда.

currency evaporates, accidents enqueue, consequences materialize, plagues bedevil, greed consumes, guilt preoccupies, power oppresses, prayers whisper, candles smother, hours sink, the past tyrannizes, the future looms, and love tribalizes.

Their auburn, hooked, tubular windworkers sound in unison. A second duet, drowned by rainways lashing at glass, remains anonymous to all those who are present. In less than a moment, a dozen omniscient eyepairs will stare into the distant distance. They will see the grindstone gearing all to the grovel. Mongers and avenuers alike. Meaning miniaturized and memory meagered. All this will make great boneyard. They will see a world written in lines of code. They will see the Second Optimism Epidemic and life as narrative. They will see the nuclear fusion energy, Svalbard Global Seed Vault, and Biosphere 2 paradigm. They will see the Golden Age of Yellowknife, Korean reunification, dissolution of the Russian Federation, and Nigeria as a global superpower. But no one will see the timid pair, amidst the peripatetic noise of this vegetable world in lockstep, in the nearhere herenow, trudging their inconspicuously steady waltz beneath the sky's gaudy tears.

The sky is blue, I am too. Yet everything now seems clear.

Not much earlier we were sprawling the College Street T&T for a choking hour, during which we would accrue two bags of dumplings, one of which NOPARKING would leave in his bag to fuse into a singleness, and two kilograms of pork belly to complement the one kilogram already in our freezer, which we hadn't thought to defrost before our stats exam. In my defense, I had sprinted out of the Putnam room at 1:26 down one flight of OISE stairs out onto the street looked left center right and left again jaywalked across Bloor glared at my reflection in the mirrors on Devonshire that only exist because of the perennial construction in front of Goldring devoured a pizza slice or two from the Buttery on my way up the stairs to the suite didn't bother taking off my wet boots walked into my Drop Your Shoulders... picked up my exam materials headed for the exam centre in a nearly zero curvature regular line although I didn't cut across the front lawn because it was soaked and I waited a minute at the crosswalk on College, all while feeling relatively content at the two solves I was able to salvage in my just over two hours of sitting in the same room as The Ignacio Uriarte-Tuero, who I deeply admire for being one of the everrare math prodigies who fulfill their potential as a mathematician, as opposed to a quant or domestic terrorist. As the years peel off the distinction grows harder to detect.

Throughout the day, my mind in-termined-ly dreams up a storm.

---

The sun crinkles over the Appalachians. The floodplain is desiccated and caulked with blood. The ever-vescent hum of freedom now sounds a dustbowl ballad. And the beltway drives me in circles. Brakelights and treadmarks pollute the tarmac ahead — mostly my own. Towering billboards have been gouged of their heraldry. This filthy road no longer has a beginning or end. But in my failing eyes, it's still Babylon.

My eddying heart skips as I hurdle past the Archimede-ath exit. The throttle grows just noticeably heavier under my foot. I once found Vesuvius in a pickup, folding into its own mangled metal frame. Screams emanated from the driverless inferno. Glass stabbing the pavement and a croaking inebriate singing *Les désespérés*. Oddly, though not enough, I was reminded of my father. How he would Satur-daily drown his sorrows in whiskey, sprawled in that mournful corner of a Halifax pub. Not long thereafter, he met a girl at a softball game and told her he was going to marry her. And he never said a word that wasn't true.

I see it all. A facelessly muddied man tows himself out of the sewer. Barbs of fire and glass obtrude from the trunks which hosted his legs. At the gas station, a woman shells out her last twelve dollars and fourty-four cents. She weeps as the counter increments, dollars much faster than gallons. The rubberous artery spurts its last drops. A truckfull of octane and nowhere to dart; the hapless exodus. A firing squad perches above the turnpike. The leering sun conceals the figure staring down the barrel, but I understand he is laughing.

The major lives a country mile away, I've been told. No one really knows him, no one ever sees him. If one did, he would surely see the harlot turned virgin.

The lamptower in immolation surveyed staunchly the gully by the freeway, bestrewn with a small nation of motor vehicles bleeding to death. Mingling with the ashes, a body emerged from the rubble. With panoptic cruelty and murderous intent, the lantern drops. The man in the corner endures her pleadingly empty stare as she unfolds her wallet to reveal a blackened gash. A few shillings scurry out. She slides them over the counter without lifting her gaze and walks out. Rifles cock between his laughter. Nobody waited for fire.

I thought it impossible to recall her sweet face. I never got to tell her about all the sunshine in her smile and the dark waterfall spilled by the wind against her hair. She gently cocked her head, as if to suggest *This Is All Your Fault*. She took me by the hand and dragged me along the pavement, to unveil to me all I had seen but never known. And I've been chasing a future down these four lanes eversince. But the major has been disowned. I've had to learn to clamber along this dirty road without a map or a hand to hold — with nothing but thirty reasons to die balancing on the dash.

---

Yet no set of circumstances in which I found myself on that hectic day (and I solved A5!) was nearly as interesting as the derailment of my reality induced by the simplest of questions, posed to me in a Romance language upon passing through the keyclutching Please Use Your Assigned Washroom for just the sixth time that day:

— Est-ce qu'elle est votre intérêt?

The answer is a lie, but the saxophones wail on.

---

#### Scene 2: Existence or Uniqueness
— Nothing is eternal, except possibly God.

Ignacio's booming voice, followed by his exceptionally squealy giggle. Ba-Lue Bolivar Ba-Lues are, I wish I could say. Koffler House. February 7, 2025.

A rather distasteful remark to make to a Spaniard. Like the decapitated dismembered Clochafarmore-bound Cú Chulainn, I am unfit to die. Even though for a greater part of my cold kernel in eternity, I have existed under - no - *through* the proscenium that my number will be called at the pitiful age of 21 - orwasit 23. Comically, I found - in Occam - this - not Buddha - not Marcus Aurelius, Sartre, Spinoza, Descartes, or Kaczynski - not even Mahler - just maybe JC - to be the most artful acquittal of all my agonies - orwasit angst. Only two - orwasit four years to go. Yet as I hurtle toward this ordinal faster than my reflection in a mirror, I - rather remarkably - do not feel this binary equaliser was nearly as unfull or unfaithful as I had convinced myself it would be. I have the dimples of a boy and the kneecaps of a retired marathon runner. I have loved - in the most Wagnerian - and I love with all my chest and fingertips. I have embodied the acuteness of Feldman, embedded the erudition of Borges, enacted the recognitions of Grothendieck, and extended the idiosyncrasy of Repka. Few thoughts truly imperil my mind between the rooster's continuous pelting. Yet here I am, convulsing over the validity of pasting together local solutions given by Picard–Lindelöf to obtain a maximal interval of existence:

— How can you *do* this?

Ignacio stares at the chalkboard.

— Ah.

Ignacio stares at the chalkboard.

— So you ask me how can I do this and my answer to your question is let tee cero star be the supremum of the set of tee such that ex tee equals why tee...

Of course. The miraculous lub.

— Does this make sense?

— Yes, thank you.

— No, thank *you*.

Chalk white faces across the classroom chuck a few chuckles.

A less callous conversation than would be invoking Bolivar.

I leave the auditorium mildly amazed. I suppose I dreaded learning differential equations for so long that I had forgotten to do so, now that I really am.

---

<!-- I return to my humble abode to a discordant message from GabesGOD. Attached is a one hundred and twenty-four slide introduction to mathematical neuroscience. I zip through the administrative affairs and crawl between the neuroscientific vernacular I wish I would comprehend. Upon sight of nullclines and bifurcations on the horizon, I succumb to Zeno's grasp. Eigenvalues of the Jacobian cross the imaginary axis and fixed point attractors transfigure into oscillators and singularity metamorphs into cyclicity, according to a two-dimensional asymptotic model of Catherine Morris and Harold Lecar whose assumptions I cannot decipher, but whose beauty I cannot refuse. I am left in horror - no - *awe* at the fact that I have learned to stop worrying and love dynamical systems. -->

<!-- ---
#### Scene 3: A More Disappointing Sant Jordi; Or, "I Needed This From Someone Great But I Never Thought It Would Be You"
Valentine's Day, 2025. In Goodlettsville, Tennessee, a steelframed arm with certitude creases pink and ivory papyrus cleanly down the middle. On the hem of Davenport and Avenue, a florist tightly shawls a scarlet ribbon around the neck of a bundle of roses. Within the confines of a 300 square-foot Stoneybatter gaff, wife and husband of twenty-three years share a rare moment of recognition. From the clocktower of Kronborg, an investment banker leaps while pressing a portrait of his lover against the left side of his sternum. Only strides away, a long way from Brussels, an infant stares at the uneven pavement, too meurtris to notice l'atterrissage. And under the canted ceiling in M of Owen, a flighty hand scribbles words he thought he would never say. Fondness makes the heart go absent. As he pens his last utterances, he ponders all those who croaked in this room. Two or three, muses. My love, let's make it four. Bleary are his footsteps down the tunnel of love.

make not a sound as he bolts down the hallway and gently slides a leaf under her door. Bolts away. Walks into a deserted gymnasium and laughs at nothing important.

*Shoot out the lights.*

Checks his email for the first time today. Eyes alight. While he composed his letter, another was being composed for him. Fourteen to twenty-eight hours. I choose twenty-eight. The Strongest Genuinely Computable (and Fun) Knot Invariant in 2024. Most curious. Outside, the traffic lights glow neither red nor yellow nor green. These large automobiles have not a clue where they will wind up. Cross the blanketed street without being hit-and-ran. It's darker inside. All the tall wooden doors are sealed.

--- -->