---
layout: default
title: Why Classrooms Fail I
permalink: /classrooms1/
---

# Why Classrooms Fail I
<p class="date">May 2025</p>

From February to May 2025, I helped deliver an Introduction to Number Theory course at AoPS. I've decided to start writing a post-mortem for each class I teach, so that I might refine my own teaching practices, and perhaps even forward it to the AoPS curriculum developers for their consideration. I'm not sure whether I will teach number theory again, but there is still plenty to learn from this course. My reflections are roughly organized in increasing order of generality.

By far the most problematic concept for students was the Euclidean Algorithm. The first time we showed the Algorithm in Week 4, the primary response was agitation. The next lesson, and the lesson after, and even into Week 10, we continued to receive questions surrounding its validity, or its application to non-GCD problems. This was entirely unexpected for me, as I don't remember the Algorithm being particularly difficult to learn. Naturally, I suspect the missing cobblestones along the inferential pathway are moreso a fault of our instruction rather than a natural hurdle in learning the Algorithm. So far, I've detected two clear shortcomings in our approach: our initial overemphasis on the Euclidean Algorithm being a GCD-finder (which it is, but it is also much more) and a shortage of practice.

The Algorithm was initially presented as a GCD-finder, which it of course is, but I think we could have placed more emphasis on the underlying arguments rather than the final result. The in-class examples did not seem very insightful towards how the Algorithm worked, and I should have walked shorter strides, writing out every factor explicitly, when arguing that the GCD also divides the remainder. Slightly later, I should have also slowed down when demonstrating how to find the coefficients guaranteed by Bézout's Lemma using the Euclidean Algorithm, because it's an entirely new way of understanding the Algorithm for a nontrivial number of students. Another way to avoid the GCD-tunnel vision that most students get trapped into would be to include more procedural exercises in the homework. For example, asking students to fill in various intermediate steps in one run of the Euclidean Algorithm rather than just the final answer. And doing the same with Bézout. Or, a more abstract question asking students to run the Euclidean Algorithm on two variables related given some information about their prime factorizations. I don't think it's too unreasonable to dedicate more time towards the Euclidean Algorithm (one and a half classes rather than two half-classes), because a greater understanding of it will directly translate to a greater understanding of everything that follows. One way to create this space in the course schedule would be to axe off base number arithmetic, which leads me to my next remark.

The topic I had most difficulty explaining was base number arithmetic. Conceptually, students did not find it overly hard, but the computations are rather clunky and uninsightful. Thus it was extremely difficult to address confusion, because it almost entirely stemmed from trouble following the dense arithmetic. It's true bases have clever applications in cryptography and computer science, but our students lack the familiarity with these two fields to compellingly motivate these examples. In my opinion, learning base number arithmetic helps rather little in developing number theoretic fluency, so I don't see a place for it in an introductory course such as this.

In our last lecture, we looked at RSA encryption, a few challenging contest problems, and continued fractions. I have slight issues with the first and last topics, because we received many more puzzled whispers than we could address. I'm 200% in favour of teaching students how to apply the math they learn from the front-end to the back-end, but I think this detour into RSA encryption was too rushed. Realistically, it should have occupied at least 60 minutes, if not the whole 90. Instead, we were left with no choice but to rush through all the technical jargon and eventually the theory behind the encryption / decryption procedures, which created far more confusion and anxiety than it alleviated. On the other hand, continued fractions were very cool and some students were able to look past the sloppy appeals to convergence, but most were left terribly confused about the meaning of infinity in this context. Since we can't afford to spend an entire class rigorously treating sequences, I would rather just cut this out to make more room for the applications of number theory to RSA encryption.

More generally, I think AoPS should ration more attention towards applications, especially in these introductory courses. Not only do they work excellently as capstones, it's important to remind our younger students that there's more to learn beyond math. Despite having branched out to other letters in STEM quite effectively, we've yet to rival our output of mathematically accomplished students in the STE. As far as I can see, it's because our students on aggregate love math more than any other subjects, which is positively reinforced by our curriculum and staff mostly revolving around math.

This class was more tediously computational than any other I've taught. Trying to squeeze in (let alone emphasize) the intuition behind all the number theory the students learned proved to be the highest hurdle I hustled to hop. I won't include them all here, but I have many hyperspecific self-notes on how to better motivate certain concepts, or how to provide more reliable arithmetic intuition for certain number-theoretic facts we left without proof. Briefly:
* Don't use the word 'power series' for number bases. Use looser terminology like 'places', 'leftmost', 'third from the right', or adapt the 'ones, tens, hundreds, ...' terminology as, for example in base 16, 'ones, sixteens, 256s, ...'
* Word problems are great for motivating / building intuition about common multiples and common divisors.
* Explain each step of the Euclidean Algorithm (with Bézout) in words.
* Word problems are decent for factorials too.
* Be more careful about the multiplicative inverse analogy with the rationals. Make sure students know we are looking for a residue, not a rational number.
* In fact, maybe even motivate modular arithmetic through Bézout and multiplicative inverses. This demands some significant changes in sequencing, but I quite like the idea.
* And so many more...

At large, I should improve my decision-making with respect to the quality-quantity tradeoff in the examples I present. I often regretted trying to run through two similar examples quickly when one thorough example would be more insightful, and vice versa. I did a particularly poor job at modeling the thought process behind modular arithmetic. Though not an excuse, arithmetic intuition is much more difficult to cultivate than its geometric or combinatorial counterparts. (<a href="https://isthisprime.com/game/" target="_blank">When does a number 'look' prime?</a>) In particular, you can't dig yourself out by drawing diagrams or thinking about counting objects. Regardless, prime modulus (finite field, but I'm not allowed to use that word in my classroom) arithmetic does bear a pretty intuitive algebrao-computational structure. I could have started with this simpler case, which would also interact nicely with the idea to start with multiplicative inverses, and would allow us to dispose of all the finnicky coprimality assumptions needed for our nicer results. This is a mistake I've made in my teaching before: I incorrectly believe some idea to be more digestible in greater generality — either because that's how I understand it or because that's how I originally learnt it — and thereby lose the naturalness or familiarity of its special case.

Classroom participation and attendance in office hours declined more or less linearly across the 12 weeks. I shouldn't rule out the possibility that our instruction simply got dry, but in my biased view, the course got much more exciting in the second half, and anecdotally, we received more expressions of said excitement at the bigger results towards the end of the course such as the Chinese Remainder Theorem and everything you can solve with multiplicative inverses. So to me, this reads as an indication that the course content / homework saw insufficient increase in difficulty, and students became less engaged over time as a result. Aside from my issues with base number arithmetic detailed above, I think the course grows in difficulty with very plausibly optimal steepness, so I would look into making the homework more involved as students acquire more tools and more fluency in number theoretic arguments.

I've almost exclusively discussed our failures in delivering this course; such is my nature. I offer my apologies, for this is horribly misleading; just about everything I haven't mentioned about the course was an immense success and it is my great pleasure to thank Thinula, Johann, the graders, halpers, substitutes, and AoPS staff for making this course so fruitful for all our students. I hope for the opportunity to work with you again in the future.

---
