---
layout: default
title: To symmetrize the egregore
permalink: /fusrp/
---

# To symmetrize the egregore
<p class="font3 right">16 AUGUST 2025</p>
For the lovely FUSRPers and Professor Hadi Salmasian.

Yesterday, I pronounced my last goodbyes to the fastest friends I've ever made. We arranged some fuzzy plans to visit one another in our respective cities of dwelling, but O how pitiful are we at predicting the future.

My primary audience will know exactly what I'm referring to, but I just concluded a summer research program in representations of [quantum groups](https://drorbn.net/AcademicPensieve/2017-09/one/A_Conspiracy_Theory.pdf) at The Fields Institute. Our project still has ways to go, and provided I have no clue where it will wind up, I cannot grant it the retrospective it deserves, yet. Some thoughts on the program itself, however, have been collected here.

I have never immersed myself so fully in the mathematical community, and I've yet to decide whether this immersion was positive or negative. I am now noticeably worse at communicating in non-mathematical terms, because all but measure zero[^1] of my conversations with my research group and the two others (one formalizing Heegaard Floer homology with [Lean](https://lean-lang.org/) and the other modelling Buruli ulcer transmission) were littered with erudite mathematical glister. I hope this is a short-term difficulty, because its humour will soon decay.

On the other hand, the mathematical community is fearless. Who would've thought one of us would nearly starve to death searching for polar bears in Northern Ontario? Or work through 48 cases of rectangle arrangements on a torus? It was a privilege to bear witness to valiant integrity with such depth that I still don't know how to mirror.

From a practical view, I originally chose to work at Fields rather arbitrarily. I knew I wanted to do math research this summer, but at the beginning of the summer I hardly preferred any area of math over another. I liked the collaborative promise of the Fields program, which wound up being dimensions more enlightening than I could have expected. Through many conversations and meta-conversations on math, I have developed more concrete ideas on my interests. Admittedly, I need to get my mimetic immune system checked, and I probably shouldn't decide the topic of my PhD thesis based on my friend's wonderfully convincing exposition of foliations. But it feels nice to possess a greater sense of direction.

Even more fundamentally, it was helpful to know others facing the same career decisions as I am. To PhD or not to PhD? What next? What does it mean to become a mathematician? Where does mathematics generate its value? After careful consideration of various responses from my fellow FUSRPers, I'd like to hazard a very cursory answer to the last question. I hold vague intentions regarding how I want to Be, and I have reason to believe math is the best way to enact these intentions. Most distinguished among these intentions are:

To see reality more clearly, to fall freely into and out of truth, to recognize symmetry in the egregore.

---

[^1]: All but measure zero = almost all.