---
layout: default
title: Blackbox Theorems, not Definitions
permalink: /blackbox/
---

# Blackbox Theorems, not Definitions
<p class="font3 right">9 JUNE 2025</p>

Completeness is unscaleable.

Suppose you are trying to teach single-variable calculus to a Neptunian.

<p class="narrow">
    <b>YOU:</b> We want to describe the tangent line to a function. To do so—<br>
    <b>NEPTUNIAN:</b> What's a function?<br>
    <b>Y:</b> A function is a rule that assigns, to each element in a set, some element—<br>
    <b>N:</b> What's a set??<br>
    <b>Y:</b> A set is a collection of objects—<br>
    <b>N:</b> What's a set??<br>
    <b>Y:</b> We assume ZFC plus GRH.<br>
    <b>N:</b> What's ZFC???<br>
</p>

Of course, this is a foolish exercise. If math education started from ZFC, students could never develop the mathematical maturity to formulate the question "is \\(1+1=2\\)?" Even historically, ZFC is an exceedingly Cenozoic idea. There is hardly even a point in making the above observation, because math educators around the world have already established a relatively smooth inferential pathway to take young students from zero to one, and then from one to the rest of \\(\mathbb{N}\\), and then all the way until calculus and linear algebra. My doubts begin to flourish beyond calculus and linear algebra, but I don't claim to have a solution, yet.

But students are curious. Curious enough to brazenly ignore bureaucratic prerequisites of the public education system and confident enough to proclaim their ability to learn cohomology without any prior acquaintance with algebra.

And students ask questions. Questions so brilliant but even more beyond-the-scope-of-this-course that just make you want to laugh in their faces and tell them to wait until they take a first course in measure theory.

It's our duty, as educators, to leave our curious and motivated students satisfied ~~at best~~. The curriculum will likely provide the tools for content within the curriculum, but when instructing eager students, addressing wild questions, writing original notes, reforming curricula, or navigating other uncharted waters, our judgement is all we have. I have seen several different approaches employed to varying degrees of satisfaction, but my allocation of mathematical rigour is prioritized as follows, from greatest to least:

1. Definitions [including statements of lemmas, theorems, and corollaries]
2. Examples [and counter-]
3. [proofs of] Corollaries
4. [proofs of] Theorems
5. [proofs of] Lemmas
6. Anything else [remarks, paragraphs snuggled between theorems, intro + concl.]

Note: this list has almost nothing to do with the importance of expository and non-mathematical details, such as aesthetics, notation, comedy, motivation, and history. My hierarchies for these are more arbitrary and less general, so I've relegated them to the [appendix](#appendix-other-hierarchies) and omitted explanations.

Note: the most variance occurs between 3-5, in part due to ambiguity in their categorization into lemmas, theorems, and corollaries. Thus the relative priorities of these three should be subjected to more scrutinous case-by-case consideration.

Note: nothing in this article, and especially not this list, is perfectly general and it should not be applied as if it were. The goal is to stimulate deliberate reflection, not to replace it by a formal process.

#### Definitions
Formal mathematics is 90% definitions. I'm prepared to defend my position that not only are definitions the most important part of any textbook chapter / lecture / seminar / chat, definitions are the *only* important [mathematical] part of any textbook chapter / lecture / seminar / chat. Every other mathematical detail can be recovered from the definitions. If not directly, then with a sufficiently good office hour, textbook reference, or Google / StackExchange / nLab / Stacks project crawl. Conversely, it is much more difficult to recover a definition from a theorem, let alone make sense of a theorem without the relevant definitions.

In parentheses for deemphasis, I mention statements of lemmas, theorems, and corollaries. Ideally, statements of results should not demand any additional rigour. This can be achieved by presenting all necessary preparation in the form of definitions, avoiding the introduction of any new ideas in statements of results. Moreover if the definitions required to state a result are too advanced to rigorously formulate, I would rather omit the result entirely.

#### Examples & Counterexamples
Following definitions, examples are the most essential in terms of supplied rigour. Examples are intuition-builders and anchors to reality, or at minimum familiar mathematical abstractions.

At any level of teaching below the undergraduate, most students will not pursue a career remotely related to mathematics. So it will be completely irrelevant whether they learned how to prove the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem; what will help them, in any walk of life, is the ability to map abstract statements onto concrete examples. Properly training this skill requires not only a vague mention of existing applications for the math they are learning, but a precise description of how the many complex fragments of a definition are pieced together in a clear example.

Counterexamples, when appropriate, are equally important for building intuition and training students to identify self-deception. Knowing when and where to place counterexamples is a skill deserving of its own article, but cases in which they are nonnegotiable to me include:
* definitions consisting primarily of a condition, for example "an *abelian* group is a group such that..." (give an example of a nonabelian group).
* implication statements where the converse statement is false in general.
* similarly, containments where the reverse inclusion is false in general.
* similarly, bounds that are not tight in general.
* theorems with multiple hypotheses (show that the theorem is false with a counterexample if you remove any hypothesis).

#### Corollaries
Proofs of corollaries are placed above theorems and lemmas simply because they tend to be less technical, and nearer to the problems that we should actually care about. Their main purpose, in the context of math education, is to prove that all our abstract work has a reason to be, so if they cannot be made mathematically precise, then they should probably not be made at all.

#### Theorems
Less technical than lemmas and more distant than corollaries, proving theorems is what mathematicians will tell you math is all about. But as I mentioned earlier, it isn't what most students should be most concerned for, and deep theorems are often far more difficult to prove than to understand in intuitive terms. The following list summarizes some cases in which I would strongly advise relegating medium-sized chunks of these proofs to a reference or an appendix, along with suggested remarks to remove ambiguity about a lack of rigour.

* the chunk proves a slightly more general case of a previous result (but include a brief word to convince readers why the result holds in greater generality).
* the chunk uses similar arguments as a previous result (but be specific about this analogy).
* the chunk is far beyond the scope of the course (make sure to somehow supplement this) but represents a permissibly small inferential leap (and mention that we are making a leap).

Rather than omitting problematic steps in a proof, another option is to prove a more manageable special case of a theorem. This will teach students the overarching idea and machinery behind the proof without being too overwhelming, and most students will not look back twice.

If no such special case exists, then it is acceptable to omit the proof entirely, and to mend the cavity with *lots* of examples. Note that this is the first instance in the above list where I recommend abolishing rigour entirely. As always, make sure to outsource a proof for the brilliant students who will ask for it.

I haven't mentioned routine computations, tedious algebraic or logical manipulations, symmetrical casework, or other exercises left for the reader, because I don't omit these as often as most math teachers and textbooks would, and I don't really consider these to be nonrigorous (they aren't, unless the readers refuses to complete their exercise!).

#### Lemmas
Some 'lemmas' aren't lemmas, but the 'lemmas' that are lemmas tend to be more straightforward to prove than their theorem counterparts. Their proofs are not necessarily easier to derive (they often require a good deal of bookkeeping), but they are certainly less instructive to read, to a deceptive degree. In this sense, leaving the proof of a lemma as an exercise for the reader can even be preferrable over doing all the bookkeeping for the reader, because this bookkeeping is one of the surest ways to burn a definition into one's mind. Simply skimming a given lemma proof is unlikely to stimulate the same depth of processing, thus understanding. So lemmas are the best opportunity to demand some contribution of the reader, and for this reason it appears penultimate in my assignment of priorities for mathematical rigour.

#### Anything Else?
Everything else is [somewhat inherently] less mathematically essential, so this placement should be unsurprising. However, such remarks and expository details remain essential for educational purposes; use this space to illustrate aesthetics, clarify notation, crack jokes, motivate work, and recite history (see [appendix](#appendix-other-hierarchies)). Perhaps more importantly, use this space to give references for further and prior reading, links to cool visuals and other interactive resources, applications to the sciences, or light-hearted analogies. Let this space be sloppier with its mathematics, and exploit this fact!

As a last resort, reserved for cases where I firmly believe that even a tiny detail of definition will confuse (dare I say both students and myself) more than it will clarify, I will offer a one-word explanation: "magic". (Half kidding. It goes without saying that any undersupply of rigour recommended in this article **must** be remedied with an appropriate reference. I do say "magic", but I will also outline how a brilliant young magician might learn to harness it.)

---

## Appendix: Other Hierarchies
#### Aesthetics
1. Anything else
2. Corollaries
3. Examples
4. Theorems
5. Definitions
6. Lemmas

#### Notation
1. Definitions
2. Anything else
3. Lemmas
4. Examples
5. Theorems
6. Corollaries

#### Comedy
1. Anything else
2. Examples
3. Corollaries
4. Theorems
5. Lemmas
6. Definitions

#### Motivation
1. Anything else
2. Examples
3. Theorems
4. Corollaries
5. Lemmas
6. Definitions

#### History
1. Anything else
2. Examples
3. Theorems
4. Corollaries
5. Definitions
6. Lemmas

---
