---
layout: default
title: Defense Against the Dark Arts; Altruisto
permalink: /defense2/
---

# Defense Against the Dark Arts; Altruisto
<p class="font3 right">24 SEPTEMBER 2025</p>
So I recently discovered that [Altruisto](https://join.altruisto.com/) is no longer supported on the Chrome Webstore. While I haven't shelled out heaps of money online, Altruisto is an obvious Pareto improvement for any online spending, and probably the best Chrome extension that has ever existed. By partnering with [more than a thousand e-commerce stores](https://altruisto.com/partners), they readily provide the option to donate 2-6%[^1] of your online purchases (deducted from the store's earnings, of no additional cost to you) to charity[^2].

After a cursory search, the only alternative I've found is [Shop for a Cause](https://shop.gladly.io/), which is affiliated with  [Tab for a Cause](https://tab.gladly.io/) and [Search for a Cause](https://search.gladly.io/). From a quick look at their financial reports,
* They contribute 30% of their revenue to charity, which was $31,074.60 in their most recent report, Q4 2024.
* Since Q4 2021, their number one charity has consistently been The Jackson Galaxy Project, a cat health initiative.[^3] They contributed $3,700.84 (11.9%) in Q4 2024.
* For Q4 2024, Save the Children and GiveDirectly come in second and third at \\$2,709.19 (8.7%) and \\$2,631.02 (8.5%), respectively.
* They have contributed similar orders of magnitude as Save the Children and GiveDirectly to Water.org, Save the Children Ukraine, Action Against Hunger, Conservation International, and The Foundation to Decrease Worldsuck.

While Shop for a Cause seems to partially fill the shoes of Altruisto, I'm not entirely convinced it constitutes an adequate replacement. I don't know the technical details of Altruisto's delisting, but I'm almost certain Manifest v3 is responsible. Why isn't anybody doing anything?

---

[^1]: 4-12 times more than the 0.5% that was typical of the Amazon Smile program.
[^2]: And in my humble opinion reliable ones: Against Malaria Foundation, Schistosomiasis Control Initiative, Give Directly, and Anima International.
[^3]: This is a questionable prioritization, but user choices likely influence this. Unfortunately they don't publish any statistics about the causes users are choosing to direct their contributions to.