---
layout: default
title: Solitary demands for
permalink: /solitary/
---

# Solitary demands for
<p class="date">March 2025</p>
This exam season, I'm sailing to Aeaea and turning willingly murine. Twenty-four hours ahead of each exam, I will slam the notebook shut. I will hold a flame to all my blackened pages, hoping they will not be blackened further. I will quarantine myself from anyone who might sneak up on me and hurl questions about the proof of \_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_-\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ that was left as an exercise by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ a few weeks ago (on second thought maybe this is too far, sky below). I'm optimistic about this tactic for multiple reasons:

* **Mitigating (excessive) exam anxiety.** Fortunately or unfortunately for me, I don't grow severely anxious about academic deadlines until they are close enough to touch and only if the opposite holds for my progress, hence I try not to allow myself into such a state of unpreparedness. Hopefully physically restraining myself from each course the day before its exam will reduce these irrational responses. That is, if my body isn't intelligent enough to reschedule the nosebleed one day in advance.

* **A more perfect day.** Most likely as an extension of my senseless stress, my studying tends to deteriorate in effectiveness as an exam nears. I often catch myself reviewing proofs that I would realistically be able to produce on the spot, which doesn't contribute anything to my exam performance except maybe reduced stress. I probably can't go the entire day without thinking about my next exam. But, even passively thinking about the broader patterns or teaching a clever construction to a friend would probably prepare me better than blurting all the textbook tedium.

* **A perfect lie.** My May-to-August is quickly shaping up to be far busier than my April, so I should brush up on my commutative algebra before it consumes half the sunshine in my eyes this summer. Who knows, maybe I'll be asked to prove the Nullstellensatz on my Groups, Rings, and Fields final. Probably not, but hey, it's more fun than the Euclidean algorithm in \(\mathbb{F}_7[x]\).

* **Most importantly, it's new.** Even if my great plans gang agley, I highly doubt I'll suffer as a result. I don't see any obvious way for the novelty of my strategy to fail to inspire some increase in conviction.

I'll make certain to share my observations and results once I'm able to see a tenth of what's true.

---