---
layout: default
title: The tighter the fist, the looser the sand
permalink: /tighter/
---

# The tighter the fist, the looser the sand
<p class="font3 right">26 SEPTEMBER 2025</p>
Should you reverse any advice you *give*?

By a wide margin, the advice I've offered the most is some variant of *forcing tight feedback loops*. I don't think this advice is ubiquitously helpful, but somehow this is often the most actionable feedback I can provide to those who seek it from me. Even worse, I don't think this advice would be helpful for me. My default settings already impel me to establish ultra-tight feedback loops, and deliberately tightening them further would approach overfitting. Reliable, tight feedback loops are often not zero-effort, and people who are exactly like me should be careful not to ration too much attention towards implementing them with increasing tightness.

I don't believe this hypocrisy is unique to me. I suppose it has much to do with the people who decide to ask me, of all people, for advice. Namely, those who suspect I am doing something efficiently in an area they suspect they are doing something poorly. For the precise reason that tightening feedback loops would be unhelpful for me, those who probably *should* pursue tighter feedback loops might suspect I am their guy for advice. I thus find myself giving such advice at a disproportionate frequency relative its universal helpfulness or its helpfulness to me.

This implies a useful heuristic for identifying one's overzealousness. While [reversing any advice you hear](https://slatestarcodex.com/2014/03/24/should-you-reverse-any-advice-you-hear/) might help you promote dialecticism and evade echo chambers, reversing any advice you *give* might help you practice humility, tune your default settings, and do away with death spirals. This is not virtue ethics; it's whatever makes us change our minds more than we estimate.

---